I don't take a shower every day.

Some people find that off putting and assume I must stink. I ask them why. Apparently it's just what one is supposed to do. Yet I don't follow why that's the case. Why should my personal hygiene be tied to the rate at which the Earth revolves around its axis? Some days it's cold outside and I sit in front of a computer for way too long, not ever breaking a sweat. There are other days where I go riding my bike through the various hills of Portland on a hot summer day. Why would you expect a consistent frequency of showering through all the different conditions? Some people even say showering every day is bad for you! (insert some links to articles)

But these encounters make me think of other areas where we have similar ingrained tendencies. We have certain periods/time spans for things we take for granted, but don't really consider why.

The day is a natural cycle: Light, dark, wake sleep (with the exception of close to the poles). But the gradations on the clock are arbitrary. Why are work hours 9 - 5? Maybe it helps to have specific hours for when people need to interact. But more and more work is information work now where, even if you eventually need to interact with people, the bulk of your work doesn't need it to be. What if I'm most productive before the kids wake up and after they go to bed? Kids don't go to work, but they aren't free from the arbitrary daily schedules either. Some biological research shows that teenagers naturally fall asleep later and wake up later, yet we enforce a crazy early school schedule on them. She states of California even had to pass a law to get that to stop!
https://qz.com/1727790/californias-new-law-bans-schools-from-starting-before-8am/

Eating is another thing most of us do daily. Why do we eat only at certain times or only certain foods? When you go to a restaurant, certain foods won't be available before or after the appointed breakfast, lunch or dinner times. In fact it's considered a big deal when places advertise "breakfast served all day". Why? If the kitchen is capable of producing pancakes, does it lose that capability after dark? And why is it so surprising when a restaurant acknowledeges that they can throw the same things together regardless of time of day?

Why does buying groceries more than once a week feel odd? When I was growing up, you had to walk to the market to get bread every day. It would be fresh every day. Delicious. And since you were going every day anyway, it wasn't uncommon to grab a few things for dinner while you were there. So you didn't need to plan for an entire week of meals up front. And since you were only shopping for the day, you didn't need an SUV to carry the groceries back home. These days we plan weekly, and it feels like a failure if we realize we forgot something and have to go back to the store.

The year is another natural cycle: the seasons, the weather changing. So when a farmer plants their seeds is natural. But the months and year labels are arbitrary. Why does school go from fall to early summer? Why are the summers off? Can't learning happen in the summer? You won't get that when you work. Speaking of work, why are performance reviews once a year? I don't even remember what I did last week. How am I supposed to come up with a manifest of what I did for the whole year, let alone convince people that I deserve a raise for it. What I do for most of the year will probably be forgotten. Why not more frequently, or aligned with large deliverables and milestones?

Birthdays are another weird one. Why celebrate surviving one more rotation of the earth around the sun? Some years there's nothing noteworthy in one's life, and others are full of new experiences and challenges. Yet we're supposed to celebrate both the same. Kids can't wait to get older, and adults don't want to.
